# Data Manipulation Cheat Sheet

* [SELECT](#select) <br>
* [WHERE](#where) <br>
* [Aliases](#aliases) <br>
* [ORDER BY](#order-by) <br>
* [LIMIT](#limit) <br>
* [UNION / JOIN Summary](./union-join-summary.md) <br>
* [GROUP BY And HAVING](#group-by-and-having) <br>
* [SubQuery](#subquery) <br>
* [INSERT](#insert) <br>
* [UPDATE](#update) <br>
* [DELETE](#delete) <br>
* [REPLACE](#replace) <br>
* [Prepared Statement](#prepared-statement) <br>
* [Transaction](#transaction) <br>
* [Table Locking](#table-locking) <br>

### SELECT
* You can `SELECT` all columns by `*` symbol.
* Or you can `SELECT` by columns names.
* You can filter the result by `DISTINCT` to remove the duplication.

### WHERE
We use MySQL `WHERE` clause with `SELECT`, `UPDATE` and `DELETE` statements to filter rows in the result set.

You can use following filters with `WHERE` clause:
* `AND`
* `OR`
* `IN / NOT IN`
* `EXISTS / NOT EXISTS`
* `BETWEEN`
* `LIKE`
* `IS NULL / IS NOT NULL `

### Aliases
Aliases is so important when use `JOIN` clause or to clear columns names.

You can create Aliases into:
* columns
* tables

And use them with:
* `JOIN`
* `GROUP BY`
* `HAVING`
* `ORDER BY`

### ORDER BY
The `ORDER BY` clause allows you to:
* Sort a result set by a single column or multiple columns.
* Sort a result set by different columns in ascending or descending order.

Also you can use **expressions** and **custom sort** with `FIELD` function.

### LIMIT
`LIMIT` clause parameters:

* The `offset` specifies the offset of the first row to return. The offset of the first row is 0, not 1.
* The `count` specifies the maximum number of rows to return.

### GROUP BY And HAVING
**GROUP BY**

Use MySQL `GROUP BY` to group rows into subgroups based on values of columns [with aggregation function] or expressions.

MySQL also allows you to sort the groups in ascending or descending orders while the standard SQL does not.

**HAVING**

The `HAVING` clause is used in the `SELECT` statement to specify filter conditions for a group of rows or aggregates.

The `HAVING` clause is often used with the `GROUP BY` clause to filter groups based on a specified condition. If the `GROUP BY` clause is omitted, **the `HAVING` clause behaves like the `WHERE` clause**.

**NOTE**

Use `HAVING` only to filter results return by `GROUP BY` statement, because `HAVING` executing before send back the query results to the client, While `WHERE` executing before `SELECT` statement, for that it is so important to run the query faster because the filtering happened from the beginning.

### SubQuery
A MySQL `subquery` is a query nested within another query such as `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE` or `DELETE`. In addition, a MySQL `subquery` can be nested inside another `subquery`.

A MySQL `subquery` is called an `inner query` while the query that contains the `subquery` is called an `outer query`. A subquery can be used anywhere that expression is used and must be closed in parentheses.

**Correlated SubQuery**

You can use the `subquery` as standalone query, or you can **uses the data** from the `outer query` inside the `inner query`, in this case it called `correlated subquery`.

**You can use SubQuery with:**
* `SELECT`
* `FROM`
* `WHERE` / `HAVING`
    * `IN`
    * `EXISTS`
    * `ANY`
    * `ALL`

**EXISTS Clause vs IN Clause**

* Use `EXISTS` when the **subquery results is large**, and `IN` when the subquery results is very small or with **static list**, because `EXISTS` is faster then `IN` when deal with `SubQuery`.
* When `EXISTS` checks value contains `NULL` it returns `TRUE`, While `IN` returns `FALSE`, So use `EXISTS` when you want count `NULL` values, Or add `NOT NULL` in the `SubQuery`.

**SubQuery vs JOIN**

Use `JOIN` when:
* You want to combining (show) data from two tables side by side.

Use `SubQuery` when:
* You want to combining just a filtered column from other table or the same table.
* You want to filter current table data dependent on another table, in this case you will use SubQuery with `WHERE`, `IN`, `EXISTS`, `ANY` or `ALL`.
* You want to select `FROM` virtual table.

**Please notes** that `JOIN` faster then `SubQuery`, but `SubQuery` more readable from `JOIN`, **AND AFTER A LOT OF SEARCHING** I think you need to use `SubQuery` in **simple / straight forward queries**, and `JOIN` with **complex one**.

### INSERT
The MySQL `INSERT` statement allows you to insert one or more rows into a table.

```sql
INSERT INTO table(column_1,column_2 ...)
VALUES ('value_1','value_2'...),
       ('value_1','value_2'...),
       ('value_1','value_2'...),
```

In MySQL, you can specify the values for the `INSERT` statement from a `SELECT` statement.

Also you can use `ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE`

```sql
INSERT INTO devices(name)
VALUES ('Printer')
ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE name = 'Keyboard'
                        AND column_1 = VALUES(column_1) + 1; # <= to reuse column value
```

You can returns the **first id** generated by your batch of rows by `LAST_INSERT_ID()` function.

### UPDATE
`UPDATE` statement use to update existing data in a table. We can use the `UPDATE` statement to change column values of a single row, a group of rows, or all rows in a table.

MySQL supports two modifiers in the UPDATE statement.

* The `LOW_PRIORITY` modifier instructs the `UPDATE` statement to delay the update until there is no connection reading data from the table. The `LOW_PRIORITY` takes effect for the storage engines that use **table-level locking only**, for example, `MyISAM`, `MERGE`, `MEMORY`.
* The `IGNORE` modifier enables the `UPDATE` statement to continue updating rows even if errors occurred. The rows that cause errors such as **duplicate-key conflicts** are not updated.

You can `UPDATE` from `SELECT`. Also you can `UPDATE` / filter data form multiple tables using `UPDATE JOIN`.

### DELETE
`DELETE` statement use to delete existing data in a table. We can use the `DELETE` statement to delete a single row, a group of rows, or all rows in a table.

You can use `LIMIT` with `DELETE`, Also you can `DELETE` / filter data form multiple tables using `DELETE JOIN`.

You can use `ON DELETE CASCADE` to delete child rows when parent row deleted.

### REPLACE
The MySQL `REPLACE` statement is a MySQL extension to the standard SQL. The MySQL `REPLACE` statement works as follows:

* If the new row already does not exist, the MySQL `REPLACE` statement inserts a new row.
* If the new row already exist, the `REPLACE` statement deletes the old row first and then inserts a new row. In some cases, the `REPLACE` statement updates the existing row only.

To determine whether the new row already exists in the table, MySQL uses `PRIMARY KEY` or `UNIQUE KEY` index. If the table does not have one of these indexes, the `REPLACE` statement is equivalent to the `INSERT` statement.

You can use `REPLACE` statement with returned date from `SELECT` statement.

### Prepared Statement
The prepared statement takes advantage of client/server binary protocol. That's more powerful then textual format, the textual protocol has serious performance implication.

In order to use MySQL prepared statement, you need to use other three MySQL statements as follows:
* `PREPARE` – Prepares statement for execution.
* `EXECUTE` – Executes a prepared statement preparing by a `PREPARE` statement.
* `DEALLOCATE PREPARE` – Releases a prepared statement.

```sql
PREPARE stmt1 FROM 'SELECT productCode, productName
                    FROM products
                    WHERE productCode = ?';

SET @pc = 'S10_1678';
EXECUTE stmt1 USING @pc;

DEALLOCATE PREPARE stmt1;
```

### Transaction
MySQL transaction allows you to execute a set of MySQL operations to ensure that the database never contains the result of partial operations. In a set of operations, if one of them fails, the rollback occurs to restore the database to its original state. If no error occurs, the entire set of statements is committed to the database.

And you need to ensure the database engine support the transaction.

To disable or enable the auto-commit mode for the current transaction, you use the `SET autocommit` statement.

Please note, if you didn't `COMMIT` your changes, the changes will effect only the current session but other sessions will not effect at all.

```sql
-- 1. start a new transaction
START TRANSACTION;

...
-- Queries
...

-- 5. commit or ROLLBACK changes
COMMIT;
ROLLBACK;
```

### Table Locking
A lock is a flag associated with a table. MySQL allows a client session to explicitly acquire a table lock for preventing other sessions from accessing the same table during a specific period. A client session can acquire or release table locks only for itself. It cannot acquire or release table locks for other sessions.

```sql
LOCK TABLES table_name [READ | WRITE]

UNLOCK TABLES;
```

* Read locks are “shared” locks which prevent a write lock is being acquired but not other read locks.
* Write locks are “exclusive” locks that prevent any other lock of any kind.

When insert operation happened from second session it'll be in the waiting state because a `READ` or `WRITE` lock is already acquired on the table by the first session and it has not released yet.

You can see the detailed information from the `SHOW PROCESSLIST` statement.
```sql
SHOW PROCESSLIST;
```
